---
title: "Why The Sun Also Rises Will Continue to Rise"
date: 2022-05-11
---

When the dust of World War I settled in Europe, Ernest Hemingway emerged as the literary representative of the post-war generation, depicting their attitudes and atmospheres with the simple and deep style he was known for. Desperate to write a first novel, but with nothing to write about, Hemingway found himself on a weeklong jaunt to Pamplona for the San Fermin bullfight festival. The trip, which spiraled into madness in picturesque fashion, provided the literary material Hemingway had been searching for. He would transcribe and edit the events into his first novel, *The Sun Also Rises,* an account of expats trying to lose themselves amid the atmosphere of hopelessness that followed the war. Jake Barnes as the protagonist lives as a despondent newspaper reporter who dips in and out of Parisian cafes with his expat friends. Some time is spent in Paris, where nothing really happens except simple life. Jake and his friend Bill take a fishing trip en route to the bullfight in Pamplona, where dramatic action is about to unfold. The whole first half of the novel sets the stage for all the chaos during the fiesta. The novel uses subtle humor, philosophical asides, and understatement to create an unforgettable saga of the human condition. 

Throughout the story, subtle humor lurks throughout. Especially witty are the conversations, which are equally baffling, perhaps because many of the characters are tight most of the time. Most of the droll remarks are made by Bill. When Jake and Bill pass a shop displaying a stuffed dog, he says: “Road to hell paved with unbought stuffed dogs. Not my fault.” There is also situational humor, acknowledged by the author. On the bus on the way to Burguete, where he will fish with Bill, a Basque strikes up a conversation with them in English, after which Jake notes that “the effort of talking American seemed to have tired him. He did not say anything after that.” Although the humor is not a central part of this novel, it provides a certain liveliness that separates it from most classics.

The novel also provides food for thought in the form of philosophical asides. During a certain chapter, Robert Cohn, a friend of Jake, says that he would very much like to go to South America. Jake tells him to enjoy Paris, that if he cannot appreciate Paris then South America would be no different: “You can’t get away from yourself by moving from one place to another. There’s nothing to that.” The idea of appreciating life is one of the many philosophical themes suggested by the book.

Finally, the revolutionary style of the book is what makes it great. It is fluffy and airy in the way of whipped egg whites. This is what Hemingway meant by the iceberg theory. Like whipped egg whites, there are not many words there, but the result is much more than you expected. Much of the meaning is interpreted by the reader, who creates the missing and unspoken elements in the story, allowing them to experience the meaning more deeply. There is also a certain lightness to certain passages that is hard to define but easy to appreciate: “Brett came out with Bill and joined us. We stood in the crowd and watched Don Manuel Orquito, the fireworks king, standing on a little platform, carefully starting the balloons with sticks, standing above the heads of the crowd to launch the balloons off into the wind. The wind brought them all down, and Don Manuel Orquito’s face was sweaty in the light of his complicated fireworks that fell into the crowd and charged and chased, sputtering and cracking, between the legs of the people. The people shouted as each new luminous paper bubble careened, caught fire, and fell.” 

Throughout *The Sun Also Rises*, Hemingway’s use of subtle humor, philosophical meaning, and simple style are part of what made it appealing to the audience of the day and ushered in a new era of literature. It has an effective style and conveys human emotions in a way that will appreciated for many years to come. That is, assuming people still read books in the future.
